Now let us move to another property of networks that we are interested into; the property called assortative mixing. Let me show you a picture for this. This is a network of students in some american school and the node colors denote the race of the students: black nodes represent black students and white nodes represent white students. You can clearly see something interesting: the network seems to be divided into two groups. The black students tend to be friends with other black students and white students tend to be friends with other white students. This doesn't mean that no white students are friends with black students. But the chances of this happening seem to be relatively small. This effect has long been observed by socialogists and they call this homopholy. However, this effect is not specific to the race. People in social networks tend to be friends with others who are in some way like themselves. For example, friends are usually of similar age and the same gender. 

Also, other networks show similar effect. For example, scientific papers tend to cite other scientific papers who have similar content, webpages tend to connect to other webpages with similar information and internet routers that are geographically closer tend to connect to each other more.

This phenomenon of Assortative mixing comes in two varieties if you like. First is the mixing by enumerative characteristics which means that the values on the vertices don't have any ordering. For example: gender or language or country. One cannot say that one person is more Indian than other. On the other hand, there are characteristics which come with predefined ordering. Two people may not be of exactly same age but we can still say whether the age difference is large or small. Accordingly, we call networks assortative or dissortative. 

Next question is, how do we quantify this? Given two networks, how do we know whether one network is more assortative than the other? One simple way is to calculate the fraction of edges that fall between the same types of nodes. However, a moments thought would reveal that this may lead to trivial answers. For example, all friends of a human being are also humans and so by this definition, we would have highest possible assortativity. This would be like saying that a fair coin is 50% biased. But this is a trivial statement. We want our measure to have zero value in trivial cases and high value when there is some real mixing. A much better way turns out to be this: you count the actual number of edges between the different types of nodes, and subtract from this the number of edges you expect to fall between these nodes if the edges were randomly placed! In trivial cases, this gives us zero. Because in that case, all edges run between vertices of similar type but then randomization also gives us the same number of edges between the two nodes. Or in case of coin, this would mean that we would subtract the expected value 0.5 from the observed fraction of heads. This would say that the difference is zero for a fair coin. 


Let's make this precise: Suppose each vertex in our network could be of one of nc types. Let ci be the type of the vertex i. Then the total number of edges between the vertices of the same type is this. Here delta is kronecker delta. This basically says that you go over all edges (i,j) in the network and choose those for which values are same and add them.

Calculating the expected number of edges between the two nodes is only slightly more difficult. Consider a particular edge attached to the vertex $i$. There are 2m-1 half-edges to which it can connect to. 
